# BeanStore - an easy and comfortable in-memory data store with transaction-log based persistence




Store your data as Maps or as Data Beans - you decide. You can choose for each entity. Change your decision easily at any time.
Access Data Beans like maps.





migratable data

in-memory data / single file db

persistent state / snapshot queries with java streams



Full customizable Transaction validiation
Bean Validation
transactional changes 

Optimistic locking
locked Store

full change and state history

Rich plugin API lets you easily build custom read models.


Key selling points:

* The data is persisted in one file
* Everything is in memory, query your data with java streams
* Enforce Constraints with synchronous transaction Listeners
* Build CQRS Read Models through asynchronous transaction listeners
* Bean Validation
* Migrate persistent data with Migration Transactions
* Configurable full text search with Lucene
* full change history
* A plugin interface

## When to consider?

...


### build on

We use [Kryo](https://github.com/EsotericSoftware/kryo) to serialize and deserialize transactions, [ByteBuddy](https://bytebuddy.net) to enhance bean classes at runtime and [PCollections](https://github.com/hrldcpr/pcollections) to facilitate concurrent reading and writing.

PCollections

ByteBuddy

lucene 

rxjava

### Development

Version 0.9, 0.8, 1.0
multi-module in future


## Getting Started

### Add maven dependency

```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>de.protubero</groupId>
    <artifactId>beanstore</artifactId>
    <version>0.8.5</version>
</dependency>
```


### Quickstart Code



```java

// 1. Create a Java Bean Class, inherit from AbstractEntity
@Entity(alias = "todo")
public class ToDo extends AbstractEntity {

	private String text;

	public String getText() {
		return text;
	}

	public void setText(String text) {
		this.text = text;
	}
}

// 2. Create and configure the BeanStore factory, register the bean class
BeanStoreFactory factory = BeanStoreFactory.of(new File("c:/your/path/app.kryo"));
factory.registerEntity(ToDo.class);

// 3. Create the BeanStore
var store = factory.create();

// 4. Create a new JavaBeans instance using a transaction
var tx = store.transaction();		
ToDo newToDo = tx.create(ToDo.class);
newToDo.setText("Hello World");
tx.execute();

// 5. read a list of all ToDos
var allToDos = store.read().entity(ToDo.class).stream().collect(Collectors.toList());
```


### Example Web Application

The [BeanStore Demo](https://github.com/protubero/beanstore-demo) demonstrates the features and typical use cases of the lib.

## Documentation

### BeanStore Entities

BeanStore data is stored as instances of [Java Beans](https://blog.joda.org/2014/11/the-javabeans-specification.html). 

A BeanStore entity class has to extend class `AbstractEntity`. It must have a no-arg constructor and expose its properties by setters and getters - as required by the Java Beans Spec. Deviating from the specification, it does not have to be serializable. 

Only the following property types are permitted:
* Integer
* Long
* Float
* Double
* Byte
* Short
* Character
* Boolean
* String
* Instant

The list only contains the wrapper classes of the Java primitive types. Of course all Java primitive types can be used as well.

Each entity is associated with a unique *alias*. Annotate each entity class with an *Entity* annotation to assign an unique alias. The *key* of a bean is always a long value, stored in the *id* field of *AbstractEntity*. IDs are automatically generated by BeanStore for newly created beans. The id is unique per entity. The *full* key of a BeanStore instance is a combination of alias and id.

Do not declare your bean classes *final*. BeanStores uses ByteBuddy to dynamically creates subclasses of your beans. Which will not work with final classes.

The `AbstractEntity` class implements a *Map* interface to make the bean properties accessible in a *map-ish* way. The methods of the map interface are only partly supported, unsupported operations are: *containsValue*, *remove*, *clean*, *values*.

The BeanStore is designed as a store of immutable objects! Stored beans will throw an exception if you call a setter method. You can easily shoot yourself in the foot by changing field values of stored beans. BeanStore only restricts access per setter method.


### BeanStore Factory

Use `BeanStoreFactory` to configure the resulting BeanStore:

* register entity classes
* register callback to initialize an empty store
* register plugins
* configure migration transactions


#### Register Entity Classes

All entity classes have to be registered with the BeanStore factory, using the `registerEntity` method.

#### Initialization of a new Store

When a store is created, the factory checks if the transaction log file is empty or not (i.e. if the file exists). If there are no transactions, the new empty store is initialized by the listener which is passed as an argument of the `initNewStore` method.

#### Migration Transactions

At the startup process, when the transactions are loaded initially from the file, the BeanStore factory does not use the Java Bean Classes to store the data. Instead it stores all data in maps. Only at the end of the startup process the maps are replaced by Java Bean instances. But just before that happens, the loaded data can be transformed through migration transactions. 

Use the `addMigration` method to register migrations. Each migration need to have a unique name. Make sure to always add migration transactions in the same order and with the same name. 

The BeanStore stores information about the last migration applied in the persistent file. Next time the data is loaded, only the migrations which were not yet applied are executed. New empty stores also save information about the last specified migration at the time of store creation. Subsequent startups will use this information to determine the migration to start from.

You can think of the migration name as a kind of database version.


### Write Data

#### Transactions

BeanStore has four options to execute transactions. Some of them blocking, some of them non-blocking.

Blocking
* BeanStore.locked(Consumer&lt;BeanStoreTransactionFactory&gt; consumer)
* BeanStore.transaction().execute()

Non-Blocking
* BeanStore.lockedAsync(Consumer&lt;BeanStoreTransactionFactory&gt; consumer)
* BeanStore.transaction().executeAsync()

The BeanStore always applies the transactions to the store data *ony by one*. This is achieved by using a transaction queue. All new transactions are enqueued, the store takes the transactions one after another from the queue. The *locked* variants call the callback code just when the store pulls this 'transaction factory' from the queue. The factory is then given the possibility to create the transactions. This is, how *pessimistic locking* is implemented. E.g. if you want to update all instances of an entity at once, like you would do with a SQL update statement, you need to make sure that you don't miss any instance. 

Beside synchronous transactions listeners for transaction verification (see below), this is a second way to ensure data integrity. It shares the same risk of slowing down store operations due to costly computations. 


#### Optimistic Locking

Optimistic locking is the built-in mechanism for update operations. You have to refer to an existing instance `tx.update(anInstance)` to specify property updates. When the transaction is executed it is checked, if the referenced instance is still the current one or if it has been replaced in the meantime by another transaction.

With delete operations you have the choice between optimistic locking `delete(anInstance)` and no locking at all `delete("todo", 4)`.


#### Transaction Listeners

Transactions can be verified by callback code to enforce constraints. The beans can also define constraints by using the Java Bean Validation annotations (provided by a plugin).

Other callback options allow listeners to be informed on any change to the store, synchronously or asynchronously to the transaction execution. These callbacks can be used to create CQRS style *Read Models*.

All transactions are applied sequentially to the store. Synchronous listeners will receive the change events when an transaction is applied and before the execution code returns. Only verification listeners can abort a transaction by throwing an exception. Exceptions from other listener types will only be logged. Asynchronous listeners will receive the change events afterwards but also always in the order of their execution.


### Read Data

`BeanStore.read()` returns a `BeanStoreReadAccess` implementation that provides read access methods. 

The `BeanStoreReadAccess` interface has methods to

* get type information about the stored entities
* find single instances by type alias and id
* "query" entities with java streams
* return a snapshot version of the store (i.e. subsequent transactions will have no effect on the snapshot store.)

Calling `BeanStore.close` first closes the transaction queue for new entries and then closes the transaction writer. 


### Plugins

The BeanStore plugin interface `BeanStorePlugin` contains a set of various callback methods. Implement this interface to provide re-usable components. The lib itself has some sample implementations that should give you an idea.


#### Fulltext search

The class `BeanStoreSearchPlugin` adds full text search capability to the BeanStore lib.

```java
// configure full text search
BeanStoreSearchPlugin searchPlugin = new BeanStoreSearchPlugin();
factory.addPlugin(searchPlugin);

// configure projection from instance to text to be indexed
searchPlugin.register(todoEntity, todo -> {
	return todo.getText();
});

var searchResult = searchPlugin.search("World");	
	
```


#### Bean Validation

[Jakarta Bean Validation](https://beanvalidation.org/) is a Java specification which lets you express constraints on object models via annotations. Register plugin `BeanValidationPlugin` to use this feature.

```java
class Employee extends AbstractEntity {
	@Min(value = 18, message = "Age should not be less than 18")
	private Integer age;
}

// configure Java Bean Validation
BeanValidationPlugin validationPlugin = new BeanValidationPlugin();
factory.addPlugin(validationPlugin);

var employee = tx.create(Employee.class);
employee.setAge(20);
tx.execute(); // throws ValidationException
	
```

#### Transaction History

Use `BeanStoreHistoryPlugin` if you need to access a full change history of each instance. The simplistic implementation might consume too many resources in case of larger stores. Use it as a starting point of your refined and optimized solution.


#### Transaction Log

The `BeanStoreTransactionLogPlugin` lets you view all transactions, the transactions initially read as well as all transactions written to the file. `BeanStoreTransactionLogPlugin` listens to the *read* and *write* operations and logs them to a SLF4J Logger.

